>>> ON THIS EDITION FOR SUNDAY
NOVEMBER 24th, WHAT TH
AGREEMENT ON IRAN'S NUCLEA
PROGRAM MEANS.
MARGARET WARNER REPORTS FROM
GENEVA, SWITZERLAND.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SECTION
FROM THAT WAY PEP A GET-TOUG
PROGRAM THAT'S KEEPING
PROBATIONERS OUT OF PRISON
>> THE WAY I WAS RAISED AND TH
WAY MY WIFE AND I WAS TRYING T
RAISE OUR SON.
YOU TELL THEM WHAT THE RULES ARE
AND IF THERE'S MISBEHAVIOR, YO
DO SOMETHING IMMEDIATELY
>> NEXT ON PBS "NEWS HOU
WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS IN
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK
>> GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE UNITED STATES AND TH
WORLD'S OTHER MAJOR POWERS TODAY
HAILED THE INTERIM AGREEMENT
STRUCK LAST NIGHT WITH IRAN OVER
THAT COUNTRY'S NUCLEAR PROGRAM
>> THE UNITED STATES, TOGETHER
WITH OUR CLOSE ALLIES AN
PARTNERS TOOK AN IMPORTANT FIRST
STEP TOWARD A COMPREHENSIV
SOLUTION THAT ADDRESSES OU
CONCERNS WITH THE ISLAMI
REPUBLIC OF IRAN'S NUCLEAR
PROGRAM.
UNDER TERMS OF THE SIX-MONTH
DEAL ANNOUNCED IN THE MIDDLE O
THE NIGHT IN GENEVA,
SWITZERLAND, THE WEST WILL EAS
SOME OF ITS ECONOMIC SANCTIONS
AGAINST IRAN
IN RETURN, IRAN AGREED NOT T
ENRICH ITS URANIUM BEYOND 5%
WELL BELOW THE LEVEL NEEDED TO
DEVELOP A NUCLEAR WEP OPINIO
UPON INSPECTORS WILL MONITOR THE
AGREEMENT.
MOHAMMED ZARIF
>> IT IS IMPORTANT THAT WE ALL
OF US SEE THE OPPORTUNITY TO END
AN UNNECESSARY CRISIS AND OPEN
NEW HORIZONS BASED ON RESPEC
FOR THE RIGHTS OF IRANIAN PEOPLE
AND REMOVAL OF ANY DOUBTS OF THE
EXCLUSIVELY PEACEFUL NATURE OF
IRAN'S NUCLEAR PROGRAM
>> SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY
SOUGHT TO REASSURE ISRAEL WHIC
HAS DEMANDED THAT IRAN STOP AL
ENRICHMENT OF URANIUM.
>> THE UNITED STATES ABSOLUTEL
SHARE THE SAME GOAL HERE
THERE IS NO DAYLIGHT BETWEEN U
WITH RESPECT TO WHAT WE WANT T
ACHIEVE AT THIS POINT.
WE BOTH WANT TO MAKE IT CERTAI
IRAN CANNOT HAVE A NUCLEAR
WEAPON
>> BUT IN ISRAEL TODAY PRIME
MINISTER BENJAMIN NETANYAH
DENOUNCED THE DEAL
>> Translator: WHAT WAS ACHIEVED
LAST NIGHT IN GENEVA IS NOT AN
HISTORIC AGREEMENT
IT IS AN HISTORIC MISTAKE.
TODAY THE WORLD HAS BECOME A
MUCH MORE DANGEROUS PLAC
BECAUSE THE MOST DANGEROUS
REGIME IN THE WORLD HAS TAKEN
SIGNIFICANT STEP TOWARD BE O
TAKE THE MOST DANGEROUS WEAPON
IN THE WORLD
FOR THE FIRST TIME THE LEADING
POWERS IN THE WORLD HAVE AGREE
TO A NUCLEAR ENRICHMENT IN IRAN.
>> JOINING US NOW FROM GENEVA,
SWITZERLAND IS MARGARET WARNER
SHE'S BEEN REPORTING ON TH
STORY ALL WEEK
IT'S SOMEWHAT COMPLICATED,
MARGARET, BUT BREAK IT DOWN FO
US
WHICH SIDES GET WHAT
>> Reporter: IN THE DAYS O
PAINSTAKING NEGOTIATIONS IN TH
INTERCONTINENTAL HOTEL RIGHT
BEHIND ME, IRAN AND THE U.S.
BOTH GOT THE MOST IMPORTAN
THING THEY NEEDED.
FOR THE U.S., THE U.S. NEEDED TO
STOP THE CLOCK ON THE ADVANCIN
OF IRAN'S NUCLEAR PROGRA
BECAUSE IT'S BELIEVED TO B
WITHIN THREE TO SIX MONTHS O
BEING NUCLEAR WEAPONS CAPABLE.
AND SO THE FEAR, THE CONCERN WAS
THAT EVEN DURING NEGOTIATIONS ON
A COMPREHENSIVE AGREEMENT TO
STOP IT ALL THAT IRAN WOUL
ACHIEVE THAT STATE AND THE
PRESIDENT OBAMA WOULD HAVE A
VERY UNPLEASANT CHOICE O
MILITARY ACCIDENT AND LETTING IT
HAPPEN OR WATCHING ISRAEL LAUNCH
A MILITARY STRIKE.
SO I'LL JUST GIVE A FEW EXAMPLES
OF THE PROGRAMS THAT -- ALL OF
THE REACTORS WE'VE HEARD A LOT
ABOUT AND THE PLUTONIUM REACTOR,
IRAN PROMISED NOT TO BUILD ANY
MORE CENTRIFUGES AND NOT EVE
OPERATE THOUSANDS THAT THEY HAVE
INSTALLED THAT AREN'
OPERATIONAL AND THEY AGREED TO
NO LONGER ENRICH THE 20% WHICH
WAS WEAPONS GRADE AND TO REDUC
AND ULTIMATELY ELIMINATE THA
STOCKPILE.
THEY WILL BE ALLOWED TO CONTINUE
ENRICHING URANIUM AT THE 3% TO
5% LEVEL WHICH IS ONE OF THE
NUCLEAR REACTORS
AT THE END OF THE SIX MONTHS
THEY'RE NOT ALLOWED TO HAVE MORE
OF THAT THAN THEY DO RIGHT NOW
IRAN GOT TWO THINGS IT WANTED.
ONE IS THE THE FINANCIAL
SANCTIONS THAT WERE CHOKE TH
ECONOMY AND ABOUT $6 BILLION
WORTH AND THEN THEY DID GET NO
A STATEMENT OF THEIR RIGHT T
ENRICH, BUT A STATEMENT IN THI
DOCUMENT HERE WHICH SAYS THA
THE END OF THE WHOLE BUSINES
WHICH COULD BE TEN OR MORE YEARS
FROM NOW AND THE COMPREHENSIVE
DEAL, AFTER THAT, IRAN WIL
ENJOY THE SAME STATUS AT ANY
OTHER NON-NUCLEAR WEAPON
PRODUCING NUCLEAR STATE.
SAY BRAZIL OR JAPAN, AND THA
IMPLIES THE RIGHT TO A DOMESTI
ENRICHMENT PROGRAM
>> SO WHAT ABOUT THE DIPLOMATI
CONSEQUENCES HERE?
IT SEEMS BOTH SAUDI ARABIA AND
ISRAEL ARE ON THE SAME SIDE OF
THE TABLE AND BOTH IN STRONG
OPPOSITION TO THIS DEAL.
>> Reporter: IT'S DEFINITELY A
CASE OF STRANGE BEDFELLOWS
IRRACE JUST DOESN'T TRUST, DOE
NOT WANT IRAN TO HAVE ANY ENRICH
AT ALL AS PRIME MINISTER
NETANYAHU MADE CLEAR TODAY AND
THEY DON'T TRUST HOWEVER GOO
THE SAFEGUARDS ARE THAT IRAN
WILL EVER ABIDE BY THEM AND NO
HAVE SOME SORT OF SECRET PLA
GOING.
SO THEY'RE EVEN UPSET AT THI
FIELD BECAUSE THEY FEEL IT DOE
IMPLY A RIGHT TO ENRICH,
HOWEVER, NETANYAHU STILL FACES A
CHOICE AND THEY FURTHER SCUTTL
THIS AND DOES HE START FOCUSIN
MORE OR SAYING THE FINAL DEAL.
HE DID MENTION THE THREAT OF
ACTION, AND FEW PEOPLE THINK H
WOULD DARE TO EXERCISE THA
DURING THIS SIX-MONTH PHASE.
FOR SAUDI ARABIA, IT'S MOR
COMPLICATED.
WHAT THEY'RE REALLY WORRIE
ABOUT IS ANY PRESSURE WITH IRA
AND THE U.S. ELEVATES IRAN'S
STATUS AND THEY'RE ENGAGED IN
GREAT POWER SUNNI VERSUS SHI
RIVALRY IN THE GULF, BUT IT DOES
NOT HAVE A LOT OF CLOUT IN THE
U.S. CONGRESS AND THEY DON'T
EXPECT TO DO MUCH AT HOME.
WHAT THEY EXPECTED TO TRY TO D
IS SHAPE THE FINAL DEAL AS MUC
AS THEY CAN.
>> SO WHAT HAPPENS IN THE NEXT
SIX MONTHS
WILL WE SEE MORE REGULAR CHECK
ON IRAN AND ITS NUCLEA
PROGRESS
>> Reporter: YES, ABSOLUTELY
ONE OF THE ELEMENTS IS THAT IRAN
HAS A MUCH MORE INTRUSIV
VERIFICATION AND THAT'S ONE OF
THE IMPLEMENTATIONS OF THI
PHASE ONE DEAL
IN ADDITION TO NEGOTIATING THE
BIG DEAL WHICH IS HOW HARD THESE
NEGOTIATIONS WERE, NOBODY
TALKED TO THINKSES IT CAN CAN BE
DONE IN SIX MONTHS AS THE PRIM
MINISTER ORIGINALLY PROMISED O
PLEDGED AND HE TALKS ABOUT A
YEAR AND FINALLY, PRESIDENT HA
A POLITICAL TASK AHEAD WHICH I
TO KEEP CONGRESS, HOLD THE LINES
AND CONGRESS TRYING TO IMPOS
ADDITIONAL SANCTIONS ON IRAN
EVEN DURING THIS PHASE, AND
THOUGHT IT WAS TELLING THAT TH
DEMOCRATIC FOREIGN RELATIONS
COMMITTEE SAID HE STILL WANTS TO
PUSH THAT KIND OF LEGISLATIO
JUST WITH THE SIX-MONTH TRIGGE
OUT THERE.
SECRETARY KERRY SAID LAST --
EARLY THIS MORNING AT THIS DAW
PRESS CONFERENCE, BUT PRESIDEN
OBAMA WOULD PROBABLY VET
SOMETHING LIKE THAT.
I THINK PRESIDENT OBAMA HA
POLITICAL JOBS AHEAD AT HOME A
WELL
>> MARGARET WARNER JOINING U
FROM GENEVA, SWITZERLAND
THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR YOUR
REPORTING ALL WEEK
>> MY PLEASURE, HARRY.
>>> IN AFGHANISTAN TODAY ANOTHER
TURN IN THE SECURITY-PACKE
DISPUTE BETWEEN PRESIDENT HAMI
KARZAI AND THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION
25 TRIBAL ELDERS MEETING I
KABUL APPROVED THE PLA
PERMITTING AMERICAN FORCES T
REMAIN IN AFGHANISTAN IN A
NON-COMBAT ROLE BEYOND 2014 AN
THEY ASSIGNED IT PROPERLY, BUT
KARZAI AGAIN INSISTED THAT H
WILL NOT SIGN OFF ON THE PLA
BEFORE THE AFGHAN ELECTIONS NEXT
APRIL.
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION WANTS
THE DEAL DONE BEFORE THE END O
THIS YEAR.
>> CHINA'S AIRSPACE OVER
DISCUTED ISLANDS IN THE EAST
CHINA SEA IS TOTALLY
UNACCEPTABLE
THE ACTION COULD DESTABILIZE THE
REGION
CHINA SAID ALL NON-COMMERCIA
AIRCRAFT ENTERING THE AREA MUS
GET APPROVAL FROM CHINA FIRST.
CHINESE FIGHTER PLANES FLEW OVER
IT TODAY
IT SCRAMBLED FIGHTER JET
YESTERDAY OVER THE EAST CHIN
SEA UNDER TERMS OF THE TREAT E
THE UNITED STATES IS COMMITTED
TO INTERVENING IN DEFENSE OF
JAPAN IF THERE IS AN ATTACK ON A
JAPANESE-ADMINISTERED TERRITORY.
>> IN A NATIONAL REFERENDUM IN
SWITZERLAND TODAY, VOTERS REJECT
AND INITIATIVE DESIGNED TO
REDUCE SALARY INEQUALITY
THE PROPOSAL WOULD R CAPPED TH
HIGHEST PAID EXEC TESTIFIES TH
LOWEST PAID WORKERS AT 12 TO 1
THE PLAN WOULD HAVE MADE IT MORE
DIFFICULT FOR THEM TO RECRUIT.
SWISS VOTERS APPROVED ANOTHE
PLAN THAT EMPOWER SHAREHOLDERS
OF PUBLICLY TRADED COMPANIES T
SIGN OFF ON EXECUTIV
COMPENSATION AND THAT WOULD BA
SIGNING BONUSES AND PARACHUTES
AND NOVARTIS ANNOUNCED A PACKAGE
OF $80 MILLION
>> A SAFETY WARNING OUT OF
BOEING
THE GE ENGINES ON THE 78
DREAMLEANERS COULD ICE UP IF THE
PLANES FLY HIGH ALTITUDE CON
TAKE FLIGHT CRYSTALS
UNITED, JAPAN AIRLINES, AND GE
ACKNOWLEDGED HIS CASE, THERE
HAVE BEEN SIX PLANES WITH NX
ENGINES TEMPORARILY LOSING
TRUCKS AND THEY SHOULD BE IN
SERVICE IN THE FIRST QUARTER ARE
THAT BIG STORM THAT BEGAN IN
CALIFORNIA, AND THERE WAS SNOW
ACROSS PARTS OF NOOUCHL CAUSIN
DAMAGE TO POWER LINES IN THE
TEXAS PANHANDLE.
THREE PEOPLE WERE KILLED IN
CRASH INVOLVING MORE THAN
DOZEN VEHICLES
THAT BROUGHT THE DEATH TOLL TO
EIGHT.
DIFFICULT DRIVING CONDITIONS I
THE MIDDLEST WEEK AS MILLIONS OF
AMERICANS TAKE TO THE ROADS FO
THANKSGIVING
>>> SOME GOOD NEWS FOR A CHANG
IN THE STOM-RAVAGED PHILIPPINES.
THOUSAND OF FILIPINO FIGHT FAN
FROM THE DEVASTATED CITY O
TACLOBAN CHEERED ON THEI
COUNTRYMAN, MANNY PACQUIAO AS HE
REGISTERED A TITLE BOUT LATE
LAST NIGHT
PACQUIAO DEDICATED THE FIGHT T
THE STORM SURVIVORS AND HA
PROMISED TO VISIT TACLOBAN
THE OFFICIAL DEATH COUNT FRO
THE TYPHOON NOW TOPS 5,000
♪♪
>>> NOW TO OUR SIGNATURE
SEGMENT.
TONIGHT WE RETURN TO HAWAII TO
REPORT ON A PROGRAM THAT BEGAN
LOCALLY AND IS NOW EXPANDING
ACROSS THE NATION THANKS TO IT
SUCCESS.
IT'S CALLED HOPE AND DESIGNED TO
KEEP PROBATIONERS OUT OF PRISON.
THAT'S A PRIORITY FOR MANY
STATES SINCE HOUSING INMATES I
EXPENSIVE.
PROBATION IS MEANT TO KEEP
PROBATIONERS ON THE STRAIGHT AND
NARROW WITHOUT STRONG LOCK THE
UP FOR LONG PERIODS OF TIME, BUT
IT OFTEN DOESN'T WORK OUT THAT
WAY.
SO A JUDGE IN HAWAII TRIED
SOMETHING DIFFERENT.
MEGAN THOMPSON REPORTS
>> IF I CAN'T CONTROL WHAT
YOU'RE GOING DO DO, I CA
CONTROL WHAT YOU'RE GOING DO
AND WHAT THAT MEANS IN THE
FUTURE IF YOU VIOLATE ANY OF THE
CONDITIONS OF PROBATION YOU CA
COUNT ON ME GIVING YOU SOME JAIL
TIME
>> THIS ISN'T THE WAY THINGS
USED TO BE
WHEN JUDGE STEPHEN ALM WAS
ASSIGNED TO A FELONY TRIAL
COURTROOM IN HONOLULU IN 2004 HE
SAW JUDGES ROUTINELY WARNING
OFFENDERS TO FOLLOW THE RULES OF
PROBATION AND PROBATIONERS JUS
AS ROUTINELY IGNORING THOS
WARNINGS
>> AT SENTENCING THE JUDGE SAY
NO DRUGS
YOU HAVE TO SEE YOUR PROBATION
OFFICER.
YOU HAVE YOUR TO PAY YOU
RESTITUTION AND IN THE REA
WORLD THEY GO OUT AND VIOLAT
THOSE CONDITIONS AND TYPICALLY
THERE'S NO CONSEQUENCES.
>> NO CONSEQUENCE BECAUSE TH
ONLY THREAT WAS YEARS OF I
PRISON
AND THAT THREAT WAS USUALL
CARRIED OUT AFTER DOZENS O
VIOLATIONS OVER MONTHS OR YEARS.
>> I THOUGHT WHAT A CRAZY WAY TO
TRY TO CHANGE ANYBODY'
BEHAVIOR
>> SO PEOPLE JUST AREN'T
REFORMING.
THEY'RE NOT GETTING BETTER
>> THEY'RE NOT
THEY'RE GETTING WORSE.
>> Reporter: JUDGE ALM WITH
REPUTATION AS ONE OF THE
TOUGHEST SENTENCERS WASN'T
HAVING IT SO HE DECIDED TO TRY A
DIFFERENT APPROACH, AN APPROAC
BASED ON HIS EXPERIENCE AS A
FATHER
>> I THOUGHT TO MYSELF, WHAT
WOULD WORK TO CHANGE BEHAVIOR,
AND I THOUGHT OF THE WAY I WAS
RAISED AND THE WAY MY WIFE AND I
WERE TRYING TO RAISE OUR SON
YOU TELL HIM WHAT THE FAMILY
RULES ARE AND IF THERE'S
MISBEHAVIOR YOU DO SOMETHING
IMMEDIATELY.
SWIFT AND CERTAIN IS WHAT'
GOING ON GET PEOPLE'S ATTENTIO
AND HELP THEM TIE TOGETHER BAD
BEHAVIOR WITH A CONSEQUENCE AN
LEARN FROM IT.
>> DO YOU NEED SIT IN JAIL ANY
LONGER TO REALIZE HOW SERIOUSL
WE'RE GOING TO TAKE ALL OF THI
STUFF?
>> DESPITE ALL OF THE TOUG
TALK
THE JUDGE CALLED HIS NEW PROGRAM
HOPE
IT STANDS FOR HAWAII'S
OPPORTUNITY PROBATION WITH
ENFORCEMENT.
JUDGE ALM WORKED WITH TH
PROBATION SUPERVISOR, PUBLIC
DEFENDER AND LAW ENFORCEMENT T
INSTITUTE NEW PROCEDURES WER
WHICH WERE PRETTY SIMPLE IF AN
PROBATIONER VIOLATED THE RULES
THEY'D BE PUNISHED IMMEDIATELY
>> IN SOME WAYS HOPE I
PARENTING 101.
A LOT OF THE FOLKS IN TH
PROGRAM, I THINK GREW UP I
FAMILIES WHERE THERE WASN'T
LOT OF STRUCTURE ARE AND THERE
WASN'T A LOT OF TIE-IN BETWEEN
BEHAVIOR AND CONSEQUENCE SO THEY
DIDN'T HAVE A CHANCE TO LEAR
FROM IT.
MAKE SURE YOU CALL THE HOT A
LINE EVERY WEEK DAY MORNING.
THEY TARGET PROBATIONERS AND ALM
ESTIMATE IT IS ABOUT 80% OF THEM
ABUSED DRUGS AND ALCOHOL
SO UNLIKE REGULAR PROBATIO
WHERE OFFENDERS CAN USUALL
ATTEND A DRUG-TESTED EMPLOYMENT,
HOPE IMPOSES DRUG TESTING THAT
IS FREQUENT AND RANDOM
THEY'RE ASSIGNED A CALLER AN
NUMBER AND MUST CALL A HOTLINE
EVERY SINGLE MORNING
>> TODAY'S COLORS ARE BLUE, TWO,
GREEN, THREE
>> IF THEIR COLOR OR NUMBER AR
CALLED THEY MUST REPORT BY 2:0
P.M., NO EXCUSES
SHORT JAIL STASHGS SOMETIMES
JUST A FEW DAYS LONG ARE
IMMEDIATELY IMPOSED FOR POSITIVE
DRUG TESTS AND OTHER VIOLATION
LIKE MISSING APPOINTMENTS, BUT
THERE'S SOME LEEWAY HERE
>> EVERYONE THAT SHOWS UP AN
TESTS DIRTY AND ADMITS TO IT I
TELLING ME THAT THEY'RE HAVING
PROBLEMS, THEY MESSED UP AND
THEY'RE TAKING RESPONSIBILIT
FOR IT
I UNDERSTAND THAT BY ONLY GIVE
YOUNG A COUPLE OF DAYS IN JAIL
SO WE'LL WORK WITH YOU ON THAT
>> THESE SEEMINGLY SIMPL
REFORMS IN THAT I WHATTY SOO
PRODUCED REMARKABLE RESULTS AN
THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE FUNDED
A STUDY FIVE YEARS AFTER THE
PROGRAM LAUNCHED
THAT STUDY FOUND THAT COMPARED
TO PEOPLE IN REGULAR PROBATION
HOPE PROBATIONERS WERE HALF AS
LIKELY TO BE ARRESTED FOR NE
CRIMES OR HAVE THEIR PROBATION
REVOKED.
THEY ENDED UP SPENDING ABOUT
HALF AS MUCH TIME IN PRISON AN
WERE 72% LESS LIKELY TO US
DRUGS.
>> THE RESULTS FROM HAWAII
CAUGHT THE ATTENTION OF CRIMINAL
JUSTICE EXPERTS ACROSS THE
NATION
>> WHEN I FIRST ENCOUNTERED TH
HOPE MODEL, I WAS SKEPTICAL.
MOST CRIMINOLOGISTS ARE.
>> HE'S AN EXPERT ON CRIMINA
JUSTICE AT RUTGERS UNIVERSITY.
HE'S SKEPTICAL BECAUSE OLD
MODELS THAT USE THREATS USUALL
DON'T WORK BECAUSE THE THREATS
WERE TOO BIG AND NEVER CARRIED
OUT, BUT HOPE, HE SAYS, DOES THE
EXACT OPPOSITE
>> WHAT THEY'VE DONE WITH TH
HOPE MODEL IS TO RATCHET DOW
THE LEVEL OF PENALTY
SO THAT IT'S SOMETHING THAT YO
CAN ACTUALLIA, FORD TO DO AN
THEN RATCHET UP THE LIKELIHOOD
THAT IF YOU ENGAGE IN MISCONDUCT
YOU WILL ACTUALLY EXPERIENCE
THAT PENALTY
>> CLEAR SAYS THE HOPE MODEL
ALSO WORKS BECAUSE THESE
PENALTIES ARE SEEN AS FAIR B
THE OFFENDERS.
>> HAVE A GOOD DAY
>> RAPID RESPONSES THAT AR
REASONABLE, THAT ARE UNDERSTOO
TO BE REASONABLE, THAT THE
PERSON UNDERSTANDS WHAT WA
HAPPENING AND WHY IT WAS
HAPPENING AND HAVE A BEHAVIO
SHAPING AND BEHAVIOR CHANGIN
CAPACITY
>> HOPE'S SUCCESS IN STEERIN
OFFENDERS AWAY FROM PRISON IS SO
PROMISING THAT PROGRAMS MODELE
AFTER IT HAVE NOW LAUNCHED I
COURTROOMS IN 17 OTHER STATES.
>> WASHINGTON STATE, FOR
EXAMPLE, PUT ITS ENTIRE PAROLE
AND PROBATION POPULATION INT
ITS VERSION OF HOPE AND TH
FEDERAL DEPARTMENT OF JUSTIC
HAS LAUNCHED HOPE PROGRAMS I
COMMUNITIES IN FOUR STATES
>> HERE IN HONOLULU, THE PROGRAM
IS WORKING FOR PEOPLE LIKE JOH
KENNA.
HE WAS PICKED UP IN 2006 FOR
RESISTING ARREST AND POSSESSIO
OF METHAMPHETAMINE
HIS CASE WAS REPRESENTATIVE OF
LARGER PROBLEMS THAT HAWAI
STRUGGLES WITH
HIGH RATES OF METH USE AND
DISPROPORTIONATELY HIG
INCARCERATION RATES AMONG NATIVE
HAWAIIANS.
FIRST, HE WAS PUT IN REGULAR
PROBATION AND HE REPEATEDL
MISSED APPOINTMENTS AND FAILED
DRUG TESTS ALL WITH FE
CONSEQUENCES
>> I WASN'T READY TO GIVE UP
DRUGS AND ALCOHOL.
>> THEN IN 2009 HIS FRUSTRATED
PROBATION OFFICER PUT LIMB I
THE HOPE PROGRAM WHERE HE FACE
JUDGE ALM.
>> AT FIRST, I DIDN'T LIKE HIM
HONESTLY
>> WHY NOT
>> HE KEPT PUTTING ME BACK I
JAIL
>> WITHIN MONTHS, JUDGE AL
SLAPPED HIM WITH A SHORT JAI
STAY WITH A DIRTY DRUG TEST.
THEN THERE WERE THE PHONE CALLS.
>> WHEN I HAVE TO STARTS CALLING
THE COLOR ON A DAILY BASIS
THAT'S WHEN IT STARTED TURNING
AROUND IN MY LIFE.
>> WHY
>> BECAUSE I NEEDED TO B
ACCOUNTABLE FOR THOSE TIMES THAT
I CALL, YOU KNOW
IT WAS TOTALLY UP TO ME TO MAK
THE RIGHT DECISION WHETHER I
WANT TO GO BACK TO JAIL OR JUS
WANT TO HAVE FREEDOM
>> WAS THAT THE FIRST TIME I
YOUR LIFE THAT YOU WERE REALLY
BEING HELD ACCOUNTABLE
>> OH, TOTALLY
TOTALLY.
>> AFTER REPEATED VIOLATIONS AND
JAIL STAYS, HE SAYS HE FINALLY
LEARNED HIS LESSON
HE CHECKED INTO A DRUG TREATMENT
PROGRAM IN 2012 AND HAD BEEN
SOBER FOR MORE THAN A YEAR
HE GRADUATED FROM HOPE LAS
SUMMER
>> AS LONG AS YOU WORRY ABOU
YOURSELF, YOU'LL BE ALL RIGHT,
MARK
>> TODAY HE'S A MENTOR TO OTHERS
WHO STRUGGLE WITH SUBSTANC
ABUSE.
>> YOU'RE LOOK AT PEOPLE WHO
HAVE BEEN ENGAGED IN PRETT
SERIOUS BEHAVIOR THAT PUTS THE
INTO PRISON FOR YEARS, BUT WIT
THE THREAT OF JUST A FEW DAYS IN
JAIL, THEY'RE SHAPING UP
>> IT'S THE DISRUPTIVE NATURE OF
THIS PROGRAM
IT'S NOT SOMETHING BAD MIGHT
HAPPEN YEARS DOWN THE ROAD
IT'S -- YOU'RE GOING TO JAIL
TODAY.
THAT WILL CAUSE THEM TO CHANGE
>> JUDGE ALM ALSO SAYS THE
PROGRAM COULD SAVE TAXPAYERS BIG
TIME
ACCORDING TO ALM, A PROBATIONE
ON HOPE COSTS $1500 A YEAR
PRISON IN HAWAII COSTS AROUN
$46,000, BUT CRITICS SAY THE
SWIFT SANCTIONS COME AT A COST
MORE STRAIN ON THE LOCAL JAIL,
AND THE BIGGER WORKLOAD FOR TH
HONOLULU POLICE WHO HAVE HAD T
SERVE HUNDRED OF WARRANTS FO
HOPE PROBATIONERS WHO HAVE GON
ON THE RUN
>> THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM
LAW ENFORCEMENT AND BEING ABLE
TO LOOK FOR THEM AND ABLE TO
BRING THEM BACK.
>> HONOLULU CITY PROSECUTO
THINKS JUDGES SHOULD PUT MOR
PEOPLE IN PRISON FROM THE START.
HE ALSO THINKS HOPE KEEP
OFFENDERS ON PROBATION TOO LON
AND ALOUSE THEM TOO MANY
CHANCES.
>> WHAT KIND OF CONSEQUENCES D
WE HAVE FOR THESE PROBATIONERS
>> WHEN PEOPLE VIOLATE THE
CONDITIONS OF PROBATION OR
COMMIT CRIMES THEY NEED TO GO TO
PRISON
>> IS IT BETTER, THOUGH, THA
THESE OFFENDERS ARE IN HOP
PROBATION WHICH IN THEORY HA
MORE OVERSIGHT AND MOR
REQUIREMENTS FOR CHECKING IN AND
MORE DRUG TESTING THAN REGULAR
PROBATION?
JUST BY HAVING THEM DO DRU
TESTING IS NOT SUPERVISION
IT'S ONE FORM OF SUPERVISION
BUT IT'S NOT ENOUGH.
>> NOT ENOUGH, KENNETH SAYS,
BECAUSE EVEN THOUGH IT'S BEE
RARE, HE'S SEEN ABOUT A HALF
DOZEN OFFENDERS ON HOP
PROBATION CHARGED WITH SERIOUS
CRIMES LIKE RAPE AND MURDE
SINCE HE TOOK OFFICE IN 2010
THERE HAVE BEEN SOME INSTANCES
OF PEOPLE COMMITTING VER
SERIOUS CRIMES
>> WELL, PART OF THE HOP
PROGRAM, INCLUDING MURDER, D
THOSE PEOPLE BELOCK IN A
PROBATION PROGRAM OR SHOULD SHEA
HAVE BEEN SENSE TO PRISON TO
BEGIN WITH
>> WELL, IF WE ALL HAD CRYSTAL
BALLS THEY MIGHT HAVE BEEN SEN
TO PRISON.
IN CASES THAT I'M AWARE OF, WHEN
THEY WERE PUT ON PROBATION THE
WERE PUT ON PROBATION FOR
SMALL AMOUNT OF DRUGS.
NO QUESTION SOME PEOPLE ON HOP
AREN'T GOING GET CHARGED WIT
CRIMES AND SOME PEOPLE O
PROBATION AREN'T GOING TO GE
CHARGED WITH CRIMES.
PEOPLE ON HOPE ARE GETTING
CHARGED WITH CRIMES A LOT LESS
OFTEN.
MANY ARE ALSO SHAPING UP AND
GETTING OFF PROBATION.
THE DAY WE VISITED, FOUR
SUCCESSFUL HOPE PROBATIONERS
WERE DISCHARGED FROM THE
PROGRAM.
>> THE MOTION FOR EARL
TERMINATION IS GRANTED
YOU ARE NO LONGER UNDER CART
SUPERVISION BECAUSE YOU'VE SHOWN
YOU CAN BE RESPONSIBLE
>> WE WANT PEOPLE TO DECIDE
CAN HAVE A LIFE WITHOUT DRUG
AND I CAN HAVE A LIFE WITHOU
COMMITTING CRIME
>> THANK YOU
>> GOOD JOB.
>> THAT'S WHAT IT'S ALL ABOUT.
THAT'S WHAT WE'RE LOOKING FOR.
>> LEARN ABOUT OTHER ALTERNATE
OF PAROLE PROGRAMS AROUND TH
COUNTRY.
VISIT NEWSHOUR.PBS.ORG
♪♪
>>> THIS IS PBS "NEWS HOUR
WEEKEND SUNDAY."
>>> FINALLY, IN OUR SERIES O
REPORTS FROM OUR BRITISH
PARTNERS THE AT ITV DOCUMENTIN
THE MISTREATMENT OF AN WILL MA
IN THE WILD.
TONIGHT ELEPHANTS ORPHANED AT AN
EARLY AGE AND THE IMPORTAN
LESSONS THEY NEVER LEARNED
BEN CHAPMAN REPORTS.
>> Reporter: IT'S SAID THAT AN
ELEPHANT NEVER FORGET, BUT WHA
ABOUT THE THE THINGS IT NEVE
HAD A CHANCE TO LEARN?
FOR THREE DECADES WHICH WAS HO
SOUTH AFRICAN PARKS DEALT WITH
HAVING TOO MANY ELEGANTS
THOUSANDS WERE ORPHANED AN
DEPRIEFD OF THE WISDOM OF THEI
PARENTS.
NOW ANIMAL PSYCHOLOGISTS ARE
DISCOVERING THE EFFECTS.
THEY PLAYED A DEAFENING CALL T
THIS HERD IN KENYA WHICH WAS
NEVER AFFECTED BY KULLY.
>> THEY START TO MOVE UP INTO
DEFENSIVE BUNCH AS THEY SHOULD
DO IN THIS SITUATION
>> Reporter: BUT THERE WAS A
STARK CONTRAST WHEN THEY BLADE
THE SAME SOUND THROUGH A GROUP
OF SOUTH AFRICAN ELEPHANTS WHO
GREW UP WITHOUT THEIR PARENTS.
MANY DIDN'T KNOW HOW TO RESPOND.
OTHERS WERE AGGRESSIVE, SIGNS OF
THE MENTAL SCARS THEY STIL
CARRY.
>> AND INDIVIDUALS ARE ABLE TO
WATCH ALL OF THOSE BEING
SLAUGHTERED AROUND THEM AND THEN
THEY HAD TO GROW UP WITH THE
OLDER ROLE MODELS AND THOS
THINGS ALL CONTRIBUTED FOR T
THIS POOR DECISION MAKING.
>> AND THIS OCCURS THAT COULD --
NEW GENERATIONS.
THOSE WHO DIE AREN'T THE ONL
VICTIMS.
>> WE'VE GOT TO PROTECT THE WA
WE ARE, AND THE SOCIAL FABRIC.
THE SCIENTISTS HOPE THEY'RE THAT
THEY'LL CALL NEW ATTENTION T
THE GIANT CREATURES AN
ESPECIALLY THE SMART ONES HOPING
TO SHARE IN THEIR WISDOM
BEN CHAPMAN, ITV NEWS.
♪♪
JOIN US ON AIR AND ONLINE ON THE
NEWS HOUR TOMORROW
WE'LL HAVE A REPORT ON TUNISIA'S
STRUGGLE TO RESTART DEMOCRACY.
THAT'S IT FOR PBS "NEWS HOUR
WEEKEND.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.